## Preface

It is obvious that as is other spheres, Gandhiji's ideas have a marked influencein the economic sphere also. This is so not only because of the generalinfluence of Gandhiji's ideas on the masses of the people, but also because theleaders of the Congress who are now in power have imbibed his teachings, andare naturally trying to put the same into practice as far as possible.

It is true that we do not have any definite scheme of economic thought evolvedHis economic ideas are part of his general philosophy of life; they are reflectedin his writings and speeches, mixed up with other related topics; they have tobe discerned more in his actions, which must be viewed in their entirety notmerely in an isolated way. In other words, one has to interpret Gandhiji'seconomic ideas and build up what may be described as Gandhian EconomicThought from what he did and said in this connection. It should not be difficultfor several eminent persons in and out of the Congress organization, who camein intimate touch with him and were in a position to imbibe his ideas firsthand,to help in disentangling Gandhiji's economic thought so that it may help thefuture generation to understand it better.

Shri J. C. Kumarappa is well-known as one of the trusted disciples of Gandhijiwho was asked to carry out his economic ideas into practice and in doing so hadobvious opportunities of understanding firsthand Gandhiji's point of view. It isfortunate, therefore, that Shri Kumarappa has been good enough to agree towrite this book, in which he has attempted to build up the Gandhian EconomicThought in simple, but effective language. As he rightly points out, there in nosuch thing as the principles of economics of Gandhiji, According to him two lifeprinciples governed all Gandhiji's economic, social, political and otherconsiderations, viz. Truth and Nonviolence. It is in the application of theseexposition of Gandhiji's economic ideas by Shri Kumarappa will, I trust, give animpetus to other persons, who had opportunities to come in contact with  Gandhiji to throw further light on the same, and help by making suggestions toevolve Gandhian Economic Theory. While such a development may take its owncourse, enough has been said in this small book to help in understanding moreclearly some of the ideas which underlie the official policy of the Congressorganization, which directly or indirectly affects the policy of the Governmentof India, and also of the State Governments.

It is well-known that in recent times we in this country are presented withpeculiar conflicts of opinion, methods and actions in the economic sphere, thereal nature of which it is not always easy to grasp. On the one hand, we havehad both in theory and practice considerable influence of western economicthought. On the other hand Gandhiji's economic ideas which are based onentirely different considerations are also influencing official policies in manyways. Partly due to the existing state of affairs in the country which weinherited form the British, and partly due to rapidly changing events both athome and abroad in recent times, we must realize that economic problemspresent complex and difficult issues.

So far as economic development is concerned, we are again considerablyinfluenced by western ideas and methods as well as Gandhiji's economic ideaswhich have become a part of the religion of those in power. Because of theabsence of any synthesis between these points of view, we find in some casescurious situations because of the imposition of one set of ideas on anotherwithout any common link. The country will have to choose, and sooner thechoice is made the better, between one or the other economic policy viz. theconception of the Welfare State as developed in the west, and the conceptionof economic life as reflected in Gandhiji's ideas. It is possible that to someextent the former can be modified by the influence of the latter. But it isobvious that the approaches of the two are entirely different and cannot beeasily reconciled. We may not agree with all that the author says; in fact, thereare many statements from which we may differ; what is of importance,however, is how far and in what manner these ideas can be applied to ourexisting problems and in what way they affect the policy of the present  Government. It is hoped that in the better understanding of the climate ofeconomic opinion in the country the effort made by Dr. Kumarappa will be ofconsiderable help.

C.N. VAKIL

School of Economics and Sociology,
University of Bombay,
31st March, 1951


